# CCS is Carbon capture and storage at source

The simplest explanation I found was this, from the [MIT ClimatePortal:](https://climate.mit.edu/explainers/carbon-capture) "*Carbon capture and storage (CCS) refers to a collection of technologies that can help address climate change by reducing carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions. The idea behind CCS is to capture the climate-warming CO2 generated by burning fossil fuels before it is released to the atmosphere. The question is then: What to do with the captured CO2? Most CCS strategies call for the injection of CO2 deep underground. This forms a “closed loop”, where the carbon is extracted from the Earth as fossil fuels and then is returned to the Earth as CO2.*

*How does CCS work?*

*Today, CCS projects are storing over 50 million tons of CO2 every year: about the amount emitted by a small country like Greece or Peru. Capture generally takes place at large stationary sources of CO2, like power plants. Most current carbon capture projects use a liquid to chemically remove the CO2 before it goes out the smokestack, but several new capture processes are under development.*

*The captured CO2 gas is then compressed so it becomes liquid-like and transported to a storage site, generally through a pipeline. Once at the storage site, the CO2 is pumped more than 2,500 feet down wells into geological formations like used-up oil and gas reservoirs, as well as formations that contain unusable, salty water.*

*The storage challenge*

*Choosing the right place to store captured CO2 is important. In the wrong geology, CO2 could escape back to the surface, or the injection process could cause earthquakes. Geologists look for sites with porous rock that large quantities of CO2 can seep into, with a solid “cap rock” above, and where there are no nearby fault lines.*

*There is no shortage of sites like this, even if we were to use vastly more CCS than we do today. But care must be taken in both injecting and transporting CO2 to minimize risks.*

*Fortunately, we have a lot of experience with similar challenges. The oil and gas industry maintains millions of miles of pipelines and injects hundreds of billions of gallons of wastewater into the earth each year, a scale that dwarfs CCS today. And unlike oil and gas, CO2 is not toxic or flammable.*" 
Accessed April 24, 2026
