# How do I read a graph

This game uses **graphs** to display results.

Graphs convey a lot of information in a small space - which makes it also difficult sometimes to see, quickly, what is going on. For background and an introduction to graphs, in English, there is a great BBC site you should look at: [Using graphs](https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/articles/zpscr2p#z67wjsg) (If you see this page in a language other than English, and if you know of a site similar to the BBC in your language, let us by sending an email to <simfuture@blue-way.net>.)

In this game, we use **line** -graphs. The horizontal bottom axis is time, in our case always starting with the year 1990. At the beginning of the game, the axis stretches to the right to 2025, showing you historical data, i.e. what happened in the past. As the game proceeds, i.e. as you play more and more rounds, the bottom axis stretches further, to 2040, then to 2060 and finally all the way to 2100. To guide your attention, each line has dots for some years. You can see how variables (the lines) develop over time: Do they go up, or down, or stay the same, or jitter?

The vertical axis on the left shows the **value** of the variable. Which variable? This is shown on the top of each graph, in its title and unit. If the variable is, for example, population, the title is **Population** and the unit is **million people**. We always try to start the vertical axis at 0. This makes it easier to see when the value over time (the line) doubles, or trebles, or halfs. However, when a variable throughout the game only varies between 8.0 and 8.2, as the ph value of the ocean does, then starting the vertical axis at 0 would result in a line that appears almost straight to the eye.

For most variables we also show a background with faint red, faint yellow and faint green. This is meant to help you judge with a glance how things are going. *Things* in this context means the lines that show how variables develop over time. If the line is in front of the red background, trouble looms! If the line is in front of the yellow background, stay focused, just as you do at a traffic light: Things are likely to change, make sure they change towards green. If the line is in front of the green background, things are, for the moment, ok. But check the direction, the momentum of the line. Even if it is in the green *zone*, if the momentum points towards yellow or even red, try to decide on policies that improve things. The things you can influence are shown below your graphs, in the [policy sliders](policy-sliders.md).

### Data precision
The lines and the scales give an impression of high precision. You could even zoom in to get an even better reading. That would be silly, though. Why? Because the underlying data just isn't that accurate. Take, for example, temperature. The holy grail of climate science is the global average surface temperature. How do you think it is measured? A [good introduction](https://science.nasa.gov/earth/measuring_global_temperature/) is here. A similar point can be made about [GDP](gdp.md), the holy grail of economists: [take a look here](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/gdp-is-the-wrong-tool-for-measuring-what-matters/).

Therefore, always think of lines of data with a bit of blur on either side and don't get too hung up about the detail. Focus on the patters, change over time, and direction of the line.